Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating
compute in transformer-based language
models
David Raposo1*, Sam Ritter1, Blake Richards1,2, Timothy Lillicrap1, Peter Conway Humphreys1 and Adam
Santoro1*
1Google DeepMind,2McGill University & Mila,*Equal Contribution
Transformer-based language models spread FLOPs uniformly across input sequences. In this work we
demonstrate that transformers can instead learn to dynamically allocate FLOPs (orcompute) to specific
positions in a sequence, optimising the allocation along the sequence for different layers across the
model depth. Our method enforces a total compute budget by capping the number of tokens (𝑘) that
can participate in the self-attention and MLP computations at a given layer. The tokens to be processed
are determined by the network using a top-𝑘 routing mechanism. Since 𝑘 is defined a priori, this
simple procedure uses a static computation graph with known tensor sizes, unlike other conditional
computation techniques. Nevertheless, since the identities of the𝑘 tokens are fluid, this method can
expend FLOPs non-uniformly across the time and model depth dimensions. Thus, compute expenditure
is entirely predictable in sum total, but dynamic and context-sensitive at the token-level. Not only do
models trained in this way learn to dynamically allocate compute, they do so efficiently. These models
match baseline performance for equivalent FLOPS and wall-clock times to train, but require a fraction of
the FLOPs per forward pass, and can be upwards of 50% faster to step during post-training sampling.
1. Introduction
Notallproblemsrequirethesameamountoftimeorefforttosolve. Analogously, inlanguagemodeling
not all tokens and sequences require the same time or effort to accurately make a prediction. And
yet, transformer models expend the same amount of compute per token in a forward pass. Ideally,
transformers would use smaller total compute budgets by not spending compute unnecessarily.
Conditional computation is a technique that tries to reduce total compute by expending it only
when needed (Bengio et al., 2016; Bengio, 2013; Bengio et al., 2013). Various algorithms offer
solutions to when and how much compute should be used (Ainslie et al., 2023; Bapna et al., 2020;
Fedus et al., 2022). However, general formulations of this challenging problem may not work well with
existing hardware constraints since they tend to introduce dynamic computation graphs (Dehghani
et al., 2018; Graves, 2016). The most promising conditional computation methods may instead be
those that are harmonious with our current hardware stack, which prioritizes static computation
graphs, and known tensor sizes that are selected to maximize hardware utilization.
Here we consider the problem of language modeling using astatic compute budget that can be
made less than that used by a vanilla transformer. The network must learn how todynamically allocate
the available compute by making decisions per-token, in each layer, about where to spend compute
from the available budget. In our implementation total compute is user defined and unchanging
prior to training, rather than being a function of the network’s on-the-fly decisions. Thus, hardware
efficiency gains—such as reduced memory footprint, or reduced FLOPs per forward pass—can be
anticipated and exploited ahead of time. As we will show, these gains can be had without sacrificing
overall performance.
Corresponding author( s): draposo@google.com, adamsantoro@google.com
© 2024 Google DeepMind. All rights reserved
arXiv:2404.02258v1 [cs.LG] 2 Apr 2024

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
We leverage an approach akin to Mixture of Experts (MoE) transformers, in which dynamic
token-level routing decisions are made across the network depth. Departing from MoE, we choose
to either apply a computation to a token (as would be the case for a standard transformer), or pass
it through a residual connection (remaining unchanged and saving compute). Also in contrast to
MoE, we apply this routing to both forward MLPs and multi-head attention. Since this therefore
also impacts the keys and queries we process, the routing makes decisions not only about which
tokens to update, but also which tokens are made available to attend to. We refer to this strategy
as Mixture-of-Depths (MoD) to emphasize how individual tokens pass through different numbers of
layers, or blocks, through the depth of the transformer (see figure 1).
The MoD technique also allows one to trade-off performance with speed. On the one hand, one
can train an MoD transformer that improves upon vanilla transformers by as much as1.5% on the
final log probability training objective for equivalent training FLOPs (isoFLOP), and while taking an
equivalent amount of wall-clock time to train. On the other hand, one can train an MoD transformer
that achieves training loss parity with an isoFLOP optimal vanilla transformer, but which uses a
fraction of the FLOPs (upwards of 50%) per forward pass, and hence is faster to step. Together, these
results imply that MoD transformers learn to route intelligently (i.e., skipping computations that are
unnecessary) since they can achieve equal or better log probabilities per sequence despite a smaller
FLOP footprint per forward pass.
2. Background
The transformer architecture has become the workhorse of a revolution in practical artificial intelligence, bringing unprecedented capabilities at the cost of expensive training runs and serving
procedures. This has spurred tremendous interest in making transformer architectures more efficient (Gupta and Agrawal, 2021; Tay et al., 2020). One of the promising approaches isconditional
computation, whereby learned mechanisms determine when and how to expend computation. This
terminology was introduced by Bengio (2013), and the concept was explored further over the next
several years (Bengio et al., 2016, 2013; Cho and Bengio, 2014; Graves, 2016; Jernite et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2017).
A wide variety of recent work has developed conditional computation methods for transformers.
Some of this work focuses on "early exiting", that is, learning to decide when to end computation on
a given token, allowing the token to skip any remaining transformer layers after the exit decision
is made (Elbayad et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021; Schuster et al., 2022). In MoD, unlike in early-exit
methods, a token can skip middle layers, then be updated via self-attention with tokens that that
have gone through all the middle layers. We speculate that this might be a useful property.
Other work has developed methods for iterating transformer layers with shared weights for
an adaptive number of steps (Dehghani et al., 2018; Simoulin and Crabbé, 2021). Bolya et al.
(2023) developed a method for choosing tokens to merge when running inference on a trained vision
transformer which notably requires no learning. Lei et al. (2023) make use of conditional computation
in a fine tuning setting by building on adapter approaches (He et al., 2021) to learn to skip blocks of
frozen pre-trained weights in favor of running only a small fine-tuned adapter.
CoLT5 (Ainslie et al., 2023) uses conditional routing to select whether a given token will pass
through a heavy or light pathway for each feedforward layer. Further, they use the same routing
mechanism to select whether a token will attend to all other tokens or to a select few, as in Guo et al.
(2022). Like MoD, CoLT5 uses soft top-k for making routing decisions. However, CoLT5 focuses on
a encoder-decoder setting, and thus does need to contend with the problem of efficient sequential
decoding given the non-causal nature of the top-k operation. In contrast, our current work with

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
Figure 1| Mixture-of-Depths Transformer.As in mixture-of-experts (MoE) transformers we use a
router to choose among potential computational paths. But unlike in MoE transformers the possible
choices are a standard block’s computation (i.e., self-attention and MLP) or a residual connection.
Since some tokens take this second route, Mixture-of-Depths (MoD) transformers have a smaller
total FLOP footprint compared to vanilla or MoE transformers. On the top right is depicted a trained
model’s routing decisions for a short sequence truncated to 64 tokens for visualization purposes. When
examining the choices one can find tokens processed by later blocks’ layers, despite passing through
relatively few total blocks throughout the model’s depth. This is a unique feature of MoD compared
to conventional halting-based, or "early-exit" conditional computation, which instead engage blocks
serially, or vanilla transformers, which engage every block.
MoD focuses on the decoder-only setting, and so we propose a predictive router to enable efficient
inference for conditional computation in transformers.
One successful formulation of conditional computation is the the "mixture-of-experts" layer (MoE)
as introduced by Shazeer et al. (2017). Developed initially in the context of LSTMs, later work showed
compelling empirical results for MoE with transformers (Fedus et al., 2022; Lepikhin et al., 2020;
Zoph et al., 2022). Unlike other conditional computation approaches that try to conserve or expend
additional compute, MoE transformers use conditional logic to route tokens to one of many expert
MLPs while keeping total compute expenditure constant. Our mixture-of-depths method can be
thought of as using the routing logic from MoE transformers, but rather than having multiple experts,
MoD deploys a single expert which can be dynamically skipped.
3. Implementing Mixture-of-Depths Transformers
Our high-level strategy is as follows:
• Set a static compute budget that is less than that of an equivalent vanilla transformer by limiting

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
the number of tokens in a sequence that can participate in a block’s computations (i.e., selfattention and subsequent MLP). For example, while a vanilla transformer might permit all the
tokens in a sequence to participate in self-attention, we might limit the number to 50% of the
tokens in a sequence. See section 3.1.
• Use a per-block router to emit a scalar weight for each token, which expresses the router’s
preference for that token to participate in a block’s computations or to route around it. See
section 3.2.
• Identify the top-𝑘 scalar weights (per sequence, per block) to select those tokens that will
participate in a block’s computations. Since precisely𝑘 tokens will participate in the block’s
computations, the computation graph and tensor sizes remain static throughout training; it is
merely the tokens’ participation that is dynamic and context-sensitive, as determined by the
router. See section 3.3.
We then discuss some complications when sampling post-training in section 3.5.
3.1. Defining a compute budget
To enforce a total compute budget per forward pass we leverage the notion ofcapacity, which
defines the total number of tokens that comprise the input to a given computation (e.g., the tokens
participating in self-attention, a given expert in MoE transformers, etc). For example, the self-attention
and MLP in each vanilla transformer block have a capacity of𝑇—the total number of tokens across
the sequence and batch. MoE transformers, on the other hand, use a capacity less than𝑇 per expert
MLP so as to more evenly divide the total compute across each expert. But, since they use multiple
experts per block, their total capacity is approximately equal to that of a vanilla transformer.
Generally, it is the token capacity that determines the total FLOPs for transformers that use
conditional computation, rather than the outcomes of any routing decisions. This is because staticgraph implementations account for the worst-case scenarios decisions; e.g., a computation’s inputs
will be padded to its capacity amount even if relatively few tokens actually end up routing to it,
and/or tokens will be dropped from the computation if the capacity is exceeded.
We can achieve our goal of using a smaller compute budget per forward pass compared to a
vanilla transformer by lowering the capacity of the computations. However, using a smaller compute
budget haphazardly will result in a performance degradation. We hypothesize thatcertain tokens
might not require as much processing as others, and these tokens can be identified through learning.
Therefore, if the network learns to choose the right tokens to fill up its capacities, then it may preserve
its performance. In the following we describe routing schemes that can be used for this purpose.
3.2. Routing around transformer blocks
We consider the setting whereby we route tokens to one of two computational paths: (1) self-attention
and MLP blocks, and (2) a residual connection. The latter is computationally cheap, and results in a
block output that is entirely determined by the value of its input. The former path is computationally
expensive.
The total number of FLOPs per forward pass will be fewer than that in a vanilla transformer if
we set the capacity for path (1) to be anything less than𝑇 (the total number of tokens across the
sequence and batch). For example, if we were to set a block’s capacity to𝑇
2 (i.e., half the number
of tokens as would be the case in a vanilla transformer) then query-times-key matrix multiplication
during self-attention becomes25% as FLOP-intensive as in a vanilla transformer ((𝑇
2)2 vs.𝑇 2). Similar
calculations can determine the FLOP-savings for the MLP.

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
Intuitively, the total FLOPs per forward pass decreases (and the time to complete a forward pass
decreases) in proportion to how aggressively we shrink the blocks’ capacities. However, downstream
performance will also be affected by how aggressively we shrink the blocks capacities, and by the
routing algorithm we implement.
At one extreme, if we leave each block’s capacity at𝑇 and route every token to (rather than
around) each block, then we recover a vanilla transformer. At the other extreme, if we set each
block’s capacity to0 and route all tokensaround each block, then we’re left with a very fast model
that doesn’t engage with the vast majority of the transformer’s parameters, and undoubtedly has
poor downstream performance. We hypothesize that somewhere between these two extremes is an
optimal model that is faster than a vanilla Transformer and performs as well, if not better, all while
being faster to step.
3.3. Routing schemes
Naively, one can leverage stochasticity to route tokens, akin to layer or block “dropout”. We present
this routing scheme as a control, and will show that it significantly under-performs relative to vanilla
transformers.
We hypothesize thatlearned routing is preferable. Intuitively, the network should be able to learn
which tokens require more or less processing than others. If we are correct that Transformers often
expend more compute than they need to make their predictions, then it is an empirical question as to
how aggressively we can shrink each block’s capacity, and hence, how many tokens we can afford to
route around each block.
There are two learned routing schemes we consider (see figure 2): token-choice and expert-choice.
In token-choice routing, a router produces per-token probability distributions across computational
paths (e.g., across expert identities in MoE Transformers). Tokens are then shuttled to the path
they prefer—i.e., that with the highest probability—and auxiliary losses ensure that all tokens don’t
converge to the same path. Token-choice routing can have load balancing problems since there isn’t a
guarantee that tokens divide themselves appropriately between the possible paths. “Expert choice
routing” flips this recipe on its head: rather than having tokens choose the path they prefer, each
path instead chooses the top-𝑘 tokens based on the tokens’ preferences. This ensures a perfect load
balance since𝑘 tokens are guaranteed to be shuttled to each path. However, it could result in over- or
under-processing of some tokens, since some tokens may be among the top-𝑘 for multiple paths, or
for none of them.
We decided to leverage expert-choice routing for a few reasons. First, it obviates the need for an
auxiliary balancing loss. Second, since the top-𝑘 operation depends on the magnitude of the router
weights, this routing scheme allows for relative routing weights to help determine which tokens most
need the block’s computations; routers can try toensure that the most critical tokens are among the
top-𝑘 by setting their weight appropriately, which is not possible with token-choice routing schemes.
For our specific use-case, wherein one computational path is essentially a null operation, it might
be critical that important tokens are routed away from the null operation. Third, because we only
route through two paths, a single top-𝑘 operation can efficiently split the tokens into two mutually
exclusive sets, one for each computational path, preventing the over- or under-processing problem
mentioned above.

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
Figure 2| Routing schemes.Tokens are funnelled to the computational path of their choice when
using token-choice routing (left). If a given path exceeds its capacity (e.g., more than two tokens in
this example) then surplus tokens must be dropped (purple token). The exact token that is ultimately
dropped depends on the precise implementation in the underlying code. For example, priority is
often given to those tokens that come earlier in the sequence or batch order. With expert-choice
routing (middle), precisely𝑘 (in this case, two) tokens are chosen per path using a top-𝑘 mechanism
across the tokens’ router weights. Here, tokens are dropped if they are not among the top-𝑘 with
respect to any given path (orange token), and some tokens may even be funnelled to multiple paths
(yellow token). In this work we deploy expert-choice routing (right). However, because we use just
a single path, weleverage the implicit knowledge that tokens will be dropped if𝑘 is less than the
sequence length so that we can route tokens away from the self-attention and MLP computations,
thus expending fewer FLOPs in a given forward pass of the model.
3.4. Routing implementation
As a reminder of the high-level intuition, each token is processed by a router to produce a scalar
weight, and the top-𝑘 weights are then used to choose the token identities that will route through a
transformer’s block, which comprises self-attention and the subsequent MLP.
Suppose we have the set of token embeddings in a sequence of length𝑆 for a given layer𝑙; that
is 𝑋𝑙 ={𝑥𝑙
𝑖|𝑖 is an integer,1≤ 𝑖≤ 𝑆}. The router weight for a given token embedding is a scalar
produced as a result of a linear projection,𝑟𝑙
𝑖 =𝑤𝑇
𝜃𝑥𝑙
𝑖.
Our goal is to use these router weights to determine the output of a block’s computation of each
token. Suppose𝑃𝛽(𝑅𝑙) is the𝛽-th percentile of the set of router weights𝑅𝑙, where𝛽 = 1−𝐶/𝑆 and𝐶
is the user-defined capacity per batch element (an integer< 𝑆that defines the number of tokens from
a sequence that will be processed by a given function). A block’s output for a given token is:
𝑥𝑙+1
𝑖 =
(
𝑟𝑙
𝑖𝑓𝑖( ˜𝑋𝑙)+ 𝑥𝑙
𝑖, if𝑟𝑙
𝑖 > 𝑃𝛽(𝑅𝑙)
𝑥𝑙
𝑖, if𝑟𝑙
𝑖 < 𝑃𝛽(𝑅𝑙) (1)
Here, ˜𝑋𝑙 is the set of tokens whose router values𝑟𝑙
𝑖 > 𝑃𝛽(𝑅𝑙) (that is, the “top-k” tokens), and𝑓
comprises self-attention and the subsequent MLP. Note that the output for a given token𝑥𝑙+1
𝑖 might
depend on other tokens𝑥𝑙
𝑖≠𝑗 because of the self-attention operation. The cardinality of˜𝑋𝑙 is𝐶 (or𝑘):
the user-defined capacity. Therefore, the mixture-of-depths transformer accrues compute savings

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
relative to the baseline because the input to the block’s computations𝑓 comprise fewer tokens than
usual (𝐶 < 𝑆), rendering the self-attention and MLP less expensive.
Notably, we multiply the output of the function𝑓 by the router weights. This puts the router
weights along the “gradient path”, thus subjecting them to the forces of gradient descent through the
course of the language modeling task (We experimented with versions where the router weights are
also included along the computational path for those tokens that bypass the block’s computations,
but it seems to be sufficient—and implementationally simpler—to only include the router weights
along the computational path for those tokens that do not bypass the block’s computations).
3.5. Sampling
While expert-choice routing has a number of advantages, it has one distinct problem: the top-𝑘
operation is non-causal. This means that whether a given token’s routing weight is among the top-𝑘
for the sequence depends on the values of the routing weights for tokens that come after it, which we
don’t have access to when autoregressively sampling.
We tested two methods to work around this problem. The first introduces a simple auxiliary loss
that empirically affects the primary language modeling objective by approximately0.2− 0.3%, but
allows us to sample from the model autoregressively. We use a binary cross-entropy loss wherein
the router’s outputs provide the logits, and the top-𝑘 selections of these logits provide the targets
(i.e. 1 if a token was among the top-𝑘, and 0 if not). Intuitively, this loss centers the sigmoid of the
router’s outputs around0.5; those tokens that are selected among the top-k are pressured to produce
router outputs above0.5, and those not among the top-k will be pressured to produce router outputs
below 0.5. The second method introduces a small auxiliary MLP predictor (akin to a second router)
that receives the same inputs as the router (with a stop gradient), but whose output is a prediction
whether that token will be among the top-𝑘 or not in the sequence. This method does not affect the
language modeling objective, and empirically does not significantly impact the step speed.
Equipped with these new methods, we can sample autoregressively by choosing to route tokens
to or around a block based on the router’s output, which does not depend on any information from
future tokens. We provide empirical evidence that this is a relatively easy auxiliary task that quickly
achieves 99% accuracy.
3.6. Training methods
All models use the same basic hyperparameter configurations (e.g. cosine schedules equal to1× the
training steps, 128 batch size, 2048 sequence length) except for changes to the number of layers,
heads, and embedding size to produce differently sized models during isoFLOP analyses.
4. Results
4.1. Training, isoFLOP comparisons
We first trained models with a relatively small FLOP budget (6e18) to determine optimal hyperparameters (see figure 3). In general, we found that MoD transformers drag the baseline isoFLOP curve
"down and to the right". That is, the optimal MoD transformer achieves a lower loss than the optimal
baseline, and also has more parameters. A fortunate consequence of this effect is that there exist
smaller MoD models that, while they are not themselves isoFLOP optimal for their hyperparameter
setting, are nevertheless as- or better-performing than the optimal baseline model while being faster
to step. For example, a 220M parameter MoD (figure 3 model #3) variant slightly outperforms

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
Figure 3| MoD hyperparameter tuning.Variants of the MoD transformer were trained for 6e18
FLOPs to determine the optimal hyperparameters for further isoFLOP analyses. On the left plot, the
grey box indicates models that perform better than the isoFLOP optimal baseline. We found the best
MoD variant to be that which has the option to route every other block, and which uses a top-k of
256 (so, 256, or 12.5% of the sequence’s tokens are processed by self-attention and the subsequent
MLP, while1792 tokens, or87.5% of the sequence’s tokens routearound the block). Shown on the
right are the learning curves for a selection of models. Notably, model #3 achieves equal performance
to the isoFLOP optimal baseline but steps 66% faster, due to the relatively fewer FLOPs needed per
forward pass.
the isoFLOP optimal baseline (also 220M, figure 3 model #1), but is upwards of 60% faster to step
during training. Crucially, when run on equivalent hardware these two model variants take take
approximately the same amount of wall-clock time to train (figure 3).
We tested routing every block or every other block, using capacities from 12.5% to 95% of the
total sequence. While routing everyother block was crucial for strong performance, we found that
aggressive capacity reduction was best (gradual improvements were observed when reducing the
capacitydownto12.5%ofthetotalsequence, correspondingto87.5%oftokensrouting aroundblocks,
with performance degrading beyond this point). So, it seems the network is robust to significant
capacity reductions as long as there is frequent opportunity for full capacity self-attention and MLP
computations.
Learned routing is crucial, as MoD transformers that use stochastic routing (implemented using a
top-𝑘 operation on router weights sampled from a Gaussian distribution) perform drastically worse
than both the baseline and normal MoD transformer (figure 3).
Depicted in figure 4 is an isoFLOP analysis for 6e18, 2e19, and 1e20 total FLOPs. The trend
that FLOP-optimal MoD transformers have more parameters than the baseline continues for these
larger FLOP budgets. Notably, there exist MoD variants that are appreciably faster to step than the
isoFLOP-optimal baseline (measured as steps per second when training on equivalent hardware) while
also achieving a lower loss (in figure 4 we depict normalized FLOPs per forward pass rather than
wall-clock step timeper se, but from our experiments the two are tightly correlated. A similar plot
can be produced showing relative wall-clock step times and the same basic trend is present).
Step-wise speed gains come from two sources. First, the FLOP-per-parameter ratio in MoD

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
Figure 4| isoFLOP analysis.We used the 12.5% capacity MoD variant to perform an isoFLOP analysis
for 6e18, 2e19, and 1e20 FLOPs, training models varying in size from 60M to 3B parameters. Depicted
on the right are the relative FLOPs per forward pass (normalized to the isoFLOP optimal baseline).
There exist MoD variants that are both faster to step (by virtue of requiring fewer FLOPs per forward
pass) and better performing than the isoFLOP optimal baseline.
transformers is less than in the baselines because some proportion of tokens are routed around blocks.
So, for a given model size, a transformer requires fewer FLOPs per forward pass. Second, since
isoFLOP-optimal MoD transformers are both bigger and achieve a lower loss than the isoFLOP-optimal
baseline, there exist smaller MoD variants that perform as well or better than the isoFLOP-optimal
baseline, and these variants are faster to step because they are smaller. Altogether, then, there exist
MoD transformers that perform as well as isoFLOP-optimal baselines and are faster to step, both
because they use fewer FLOPs per parameter and because they use fewer parameters.
Figure 4 also reveals another important finding: the optimal MoD transformer is that which uses
as many FLOPs per forward pass as the isoFLOP optimal baseline. This finding allows one to directly
predict which sized MoD transformer will perform optimally for a given isoFLOP training budget: one
just needs to tune the model size for a given MoD configuration (i.e., capacity and routing frequency)
to produce a model that uses as many FLOPs per forward pass as the isoFLOP-optimal baseline, and
they will have the optimally performing MoD variant for that configuration. Empirically, we find that
it is better to add depth than to add width when adding FLOPs to the model.
Nevertheless, while the FLOPs per forward pass determines which model will be the isoFLOP
optimal, it does not predict whether the optimal loss will improve upon the baseline (see figure 3.
Namely, the optimal capacity appears to be empirically determinable. We found that it is best to use
12.5% capacity blocks, every other block.
We noticed that MoD transformers had memory savings relative to equivalently sized baseline
models at larger sizes, with some variants requiring fewer total devices (i.e., a smaller TPU topology).
We did not study this extensively, but we anticipate that as one scales to larger models, these savings
could be an important consideration when choosing model variants to train, and could have significant
positive effects in regards to the KV cache size during autoregressive sampling.
Figure 5 shows the routing decisions for an MoD transformer trained with interleaved routing
blocks. Despite aggressive routing around the blocks, transformers are able to achieve performance

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
Figure 5| Routing analysis.We trained an MoD transformer that interleaved12.5% capacity routing
blocks with full-attention blocks. As expected, the number of tokens that route to (rather than around)
a block is sparse in routing blocks, though the network does sometimes preferentially route certain
tokens to each block along its depth. This can be seen in the left figure that depicts routing decisions,
where we observe a vertical band of dark blue towards the end of the sequence. As expected, the
distribution of router weights are as the auxiliary loss dictates: approximately12.5% of weights are
above 0.5 and87.5% are below (histogram, right).
improvements relative to baselines. We observe patterns that might warrant further study; namely,
some tokens appear to engage each block along the transformer’s depth, while others decide to route
around blocks whenever possible. Preliminary analyses suggest that the tokens that engage with
blocks more frequently are correlated with output predictions that have higher entropy, which possibly
corresponds to predictions that are more difficult to make.
4.2. Auto-regressive Evaluation
We evaluated MoD variants during auto-regressive sampling (see figure 6). Each model was tested
on exactly the same held-out data comprising256000 sequences (500M tokens). When switching
from the top-𝑘 routing method to the predictor-based routing method we observed little performance
degradation. As in the training setting, there exist MoD variants that are better performing than the
isoFLOP-optimal baseline, while requiring fewer FLOPs per forward pass. These results suggest that
the compute savings offered by MoD transformers should translate beyond the training setting.
4.3. Mixture-of-Depths-and-Experts (MoDE)
The MoD technique can be naturally integrated with MoE models (together comprising MoDE models)
in addition to vanilla transformers. In figure 7 we present results showing that the performance
improvments offered by MoD compound with those of MoE. We tried two variants: in staged MoDE,
which routes tokens around or towards blocks prior to the self-attention step, and integrated MoDE,
which implements MoD routing by integrating “no-op” experts among the conventional MLP experts.
The former is advantageous because it allows for tokens to skip the self-attention step, while the
latter is advantageous because it simplifies the routing machinery. We noticed that implementing
MoDE in the integrated manner was distinctly better than simply reducing the capacity of experts in
conventional MoE models, and relying on token dropping to implement residual routing. We believe
this is because with the integrated MoDE machinery, tokens explicitly learn to choose the residual
path around the experts, as opposed to preferring an expert but being dropped when implemented as

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
Figure 6| Auto-regressive evaluation. Switching from the non-causal top-𝑘 routing scheme in
training to a causal predictor-based approach during auto-regressive sampling leads to minimal
performance degradation. This is perhaps due to the ease of learning this prediction problem, which
is upwards of 97% accurate soon into training.
a capacity reduction.
5. Discussion
Mixture-of-Depths transformers empirically demonstrate that one can improve on isoFLOP-optimal
baseline performance with models that use fewer FLOPs per forward pass. This means that—for a
given training FLOP budget—we can train models that are both faster and better performing than their
baseline counterparts. Previously, to train models that are both faster and as- or better-performing
than isoFLOP-optimal models, one would have to use surplus compute toovertrainsmaller models
(notably, this overtraining technique is still possible with MoD transformers, and speed gains should
compound).
While MoD transformers require fewer FLOPs per forward pass, one cannot forego FLOPs indiscriminately. Rather, it is crucial to use learned routing decisions—much like in Mixture-of-Experts
transformers—to determine whether a token should participate in self-attention and the subsequent
MLP (requiring FLOPs), or not (saving FLOPs).We can then use any saved FLOPs by, for example,
making the model bigger or training it for longer. Our results show that indeed FLOPs may be
inefficiently used in vanilla transformer models, and that there may be more efficient ways for them
to be expended.
Learned routing mechanisms are sometimesnon-causal; that is, information about the future is
used to determine a given token’s routing decision. This is generally true for top-k routing mechanisms,
which are useful because they forego the need for auxiliary balancing losses. However, top-k routing
mechanisms present difficulties in post-training autoregressive sampling, where it is impossible to
use information about future token identities to determine routing decisions. In this work we show
that one can successfully use a top-k routing scheme during training, but not require it during later
autoregressive sampling. Eiher a simple auxiliary classifier, or auxiliary loss on the router, is sufficient
to learn the top-𝑘 routing decisions such that it can mimic the top-𝑘 decisions during autoregressive

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
Figure 7| Mixture-of-Depths-and-Experts (MoDE).The MoD technique can be implemented alongside MoE (together comprising MoDE models) in two straightforward manners: staged, which first
implementsMoDmachinerypriortoMoEmachinery, andintegrated, whichusesoneroutingoperation
to funnel tokens to either experts or no-op operations.
sampling, with minimal to no performance degradation.
Intuitively, a token might learn to route around blocks because the prediction being made at that
step is easier, and hence, does not require as much compute. However, this strategy is undoubtedly
not all that the network learns. If a token does not participate in self-attention at a certain block,
then later tokens will also not be able to attend toit. Thus, whether tokens decide to route or not
impacts both the current step’s prediction and future predictions via causal self-attention, and how
the network balances these effects is guided by their influence on the overall language modeling
objective.
This insight opens the door to MoD variants that decouple the routing for queries, keys and values.
For example, perhaps a token would prefer to be among the queries, but not the keys, for a given
self-attention computation. One can imagine extending this idea even further into the domain of
"long-term memory": perhaps there are tokens that would be extremely valuable as keys, regardless
of whether it is useful for them to also be among the queries at the step of their occurrence. Learned
routing could be a powerful mechanism for deciding which tokens these might be, perhaps funnelling
them into a long-term memory buffer that is available during future self-attention. One advantage
of such an approach to long-term memory is that tokens decide once, at the moment of "memory
encoding", whether they should be retrieved in the future. This is more computationally efficient
than performing a full content-based lookup across an entire memory buffer for each step in the
future, and could be one step towards drastically increasing the context-length available for making a
prediction.
Unlike MoE transformers that route between effectively the same computation (usually MLPs),

Mixture-of-Depths: Dynamically allocating compute in transformer-based language models
MoD transformers demonstrate the value of routing among differenttypes of computations. In this
work the types were either the conventional transformer block, or a null computation (functionally
equivalent to multiplying by zero). However, one can imagine extending this idea further by routing
between even more types of computation. For example, perhaps some tokens are routed to "memory
lookup" functions, and others are routed to "tool use" functions. In general, the routing machinery we
deployed provides a knob for adjusting the types of computations available to the network and their
relative cost (in total FLOPs); if one wants to introduce an expensive computation, then this can be
offset by setting its capacity to some small amount, and hence, by routing only a small number of
tokens to it.
Altogether, MoD transformers are another tool one can use to tune a model’s compute per forward
pass (and hence inference time). The machinery used to implement MoD is also generic, and opens
the doors to many extensions and integration with other techniques, such as MoE.